update documentation chapter (#66)
r-devel/rdevguide: 07-documenting_R.Rmd

The involvement of the community takes many forms, from authoring to bug reports to raising an issue when the documentation could be more complete or easier to use.

> This chapter is aimed at authors and potential authors of documentation for R. More specifically, it is for people contributing to the standard documentation and developing additional documents using the same tools as the standard documents. Any time you feel that you can clarify existing documentation or provide documentation that is missing, your contribution is welcome and appreciated. If you find it difficult to deal with the markup language, you can ask for help for that part too. Please do not let the material in this chapter stand between the documentation and your desire to help out. However, not every good faith effort to to change or extend the documentation will be accepted - sometimes the patch contribution might be incorrect, other times, while a change in wording may make some things clearer, other finer details of the corner cases or the like may be less clear, leading to the patch being declined or modified by the R-core member reviewing it before applying it (if they agree the issue is important enough to fix).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This chapter is aimed at authors and potential authors of documentation for R. More specifically, it is for people contributing to the standard documentation and developing additional documents using the same tools as the standard documents. Any time you feel that you can clarify existing documentation or provide documentation that is missing, your contribution is welcome and appreciated. If you find it difficult to deal with the markup language, you can ask for help for that part too. Please do not let the material in this chapter stand between the documentation and your desire to help out. However, not every good faith effort to to change or extend the documentation will be accepted - sometimes the patch contribution might be incorrect, other times, while a change in wording may make some things clearer, other finer details of some corner case may become less clear, leading to the patch being declined or modified by the R-core member reviewing it before applying it (if they agree the issue is important enough to fix).
```

> This chapter is aimed at authors and potential authors of documentation for R. More specifically, it is for people contributing to the standard documentation and developing additional documents using the same tools as the standard documents. Any time you feel that you can clarify existing documentation or provide documentation that is missing, your contribution is welcome and appreciated. If you find it difficult to deal with the markup language, you can ask for help for that part too. Please do not let the material in this chapter stand between the documentation and your desire to help out. However, not every good faith effort to to change or extend the documentation will be accepted - sometimes the patch contribution might be incorrect, other times, while a change in wording may make some things clearer, other finer details of the corner cases or the like may be less clear, leading to the patch being declined or modified by the R-core member reviewing it before applying it (if they agree the issue is important enough to fix).

Reviewer: Sorry, above my suggestion is a bit masked (I was hoping for some diff highlighting): I changed only the part "other finer details of some corner case may become less clear"

## Guidelines for writing the system help files (in .Rd format)

> Following are the suggested guidelines while creating the system help files in the .Rd format. A example of the .Rd format is available for [mean.Rd](https://svn.r-project.org/R/trunk/src/library/base/man/mean.Rd). These are intended for writing the core documentations but may also be useful for package writers. Extensive details of writing R documentation files can be found [here](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-exts.html#Writing-R-documentation-files).

Reviewer: Just a suggestion: Instead of referring to an external resource, you could also copy a significant portion (or all) of that as a code block and then when explaining the components later on in a bit more detail, point to the sections in the example. This would make for a bit more self-contained reading.

Reviewer 2: I agree that it would be good to mention roxygen and that this creates .Rd files but that this guide focuses on .Rd files only because the man pages for the base distribution are written directly as .Rd files.

    * The examples should not require special facilities (for instance, Internet access or write permission to specific directories).
    * Examples should also not take longer than necessary to run, as they are run when checking a build of R.
    

> 3. `\synopsis` section: The `\usage` section can have the function definition, or the actual definition can be included in the `\synopsis` section. The full documentation for [\usage](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-exts.html#Documenting-functions) says that the usage information specified should match the function definition exactly. Apparently, `\synopsis` was removed in [R 3.1.0](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/blob/0d65935f30dcaccfeee1dd61991bf4b1444873bc/src/library/tools/R/RdConv2.R#L918-L919), but it is still mentioned in [Rds](https://developer.r-project.org/Rds.html). 

Reviewer: If `\synopsis` was retired w/ R 3.1.0. I'd go ahead and drop mentioning this altogether.

4. Giving a code equivalent (or approximate equivalent) can be a useful in addition to the description provided. You should carefully weigh whether the code equivalent adds value to the document.

5. The tone of the documentation needs to be respectful of the reader’s background. Lay out the relevant information, show motivating use cases, and do your best to connect-the-dots. The documentation is meant for newcomers, many of whom will be using it to evaluate the R language as a whole. The experience needs to be positive and not leave the reader with worries that something bad will happen if they make a mistake. 

## Helping with documentation

Maintaining the accuracy  of R's documentations and keeping a high level of quality takes a lot of effort. Community members, like you, help with writing, editing, and updating content, and these contributions are appreciated and welcomed.

Looking at pre-existing documentation source files can be very helpful when getting started.

> If you look at documentation issues on Bugzilla, you will find various documentation problems that may need work. Since "Documentation" is one of the possible components you can set in the metadata, you can browse by this [component](https://bugs.r-project.org/bugzilla/buglist.cgi?component=Documentation) to find the documentation bugs on Bugzilla. Issues vary from typos to unclear documentation and items lacking documentation.

Reviewer: I feel this has gotten overly complicated. The relevant info is: you can directly search for docs issues on Bugzilla + maybe a link to such a view. Using Bugzilla teminology such as "component" and explaining that this is a piece of metadata attached to each bug report is besides the point. Just my 2 ¢...

## Instructions for reporting the CRAN policy bugs -- discussion in slack (random channel)

> If you find some typo or problem on [CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org) after checking the problem or typo you can write a polite email to `cran-sysadmin@r-project.org` and one of the R-core members working with CRAN. You'll probably get a prompt reply about how the issue is going to be fixed.

Reviewer 3: I think we might want to move this to a new chapter. There are various websites that the R Core team maintain, each with their own way to report issues (R FAQ, Windows FAQ, Mac FAQ, R project web-site, CRAN website). These are all outside the scope of Bugzilla. This might be a new section in the Bug reporting chapter (since we also document there how to report bugs in non-R-Core maintained packages), or a small chapter on "R project websites". Perhaps the latter is useful as there are also other sites on the r-project domain, like translation.r-project,org and contributor.r-project.org that could be good to document briefly somewhere.

Reviewer 2: Would this also apply to the manuals?

**Note**:

> There is a `#core-documentation` channel on the [R Contributors slack](https://r-contributors.slack.com/) where you can discuss about the patches for improvements to R's documentation. 

Reviewer 3: This should then be in the previous section about helping with documentation.

## See also

1. [Writing R documentation files](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-exts.html#Writing-R-documentation-files)

> 2. [R manuals](https://cran.r-project.org/manuals.html): These are a part of the [R sources](https://github.com/r-devel/r-svn/tree/master/doc/manual). Hence, bug reports/patches can also be submitted via Bugzilla, e.g. https://bugs.r-project.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=15221. Note that they are typically referred to by their file names "R-admin", "R-exts" etc. The manuals are written in [Texinfo](https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/) (file extension `.texi`). The manual should be referred to for [how to mark up text](https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/manual/texinfo/texinfo.html). 

Reviewer 3: This part should be elevated to a new section. Since you already cite R-exts earlier, you can probably drop this See also section.

To make this guide more self-contained, you should briefly describe the bug you link to and use a hyperlink with a title of the linked bug: [Bug 15221 - R-admin/'Installing R under Windows': Missing argument name](https://bugs.r-project.org/show_bug.cgi?id=15221).

Also, you could add a list or table with the manual names and their nicknames.

"The [Texinfo manual](https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/manual/texinfo/texinfo.html) should be referred to for [how to mark up text]."

> R-admin contains information on how to [build the manuals](https://cran.r-project.org/doc/manuals/r-release/R-admin.html#Making-the-manuals) - it would be a good idea to check the manuals build if you are providing a patch. But simple suggestions could be made by describing the change or providing suggested `.texi` marked-up text directly, e.g. https://bugs.r-project.org/bugzilla/show_bug.cgi?id=15193.

Reviewer 3: Again - use hyperlink with bug title vs URL.

Ideally, someone would be able to build the manuals after following our instructions to build R from source. This probably requires an update to the installation instructions first, then perhaps we can add simple instructions here for building the manuals (cc @llrs) - no need to wait for this before merging this PR.

Reviewer 4: I think that one doesn't need to build R from source to build the manuals, but I will check it.
